From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the daily.
[Music]
The race to dominate artificial
intelligence has become an allout talent
war with tech companies offering pay
packages of a4 billion dollars and
poaching their competitors best
employees.
Today, my colleague Mike Isaac on how we
got here and why all the hype is raising
fears that AI could become the next big
bubble.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Monday, August 25th.
[Music]
Mike, we are here with you because in
the last few weeks and months, we've
started to see something truly
extraordinary happen in the world you
cover, which is Silicon Valley. I'm
talking about these enormous pay
packages, $250 million being handed out
left and right to AI talent. And I think
at a really basic level, for a lot of
us, this has been a moment where we
looked up and said, "Wait, what's going
on here?" And so I want you to help me
understand why is this happening?
>> Well, just to reassure you, people here
think it's pretty crazy, too. So it's
it's you're not alone. But I do think
it's really a singular moment in Silicon
Valley right now where all of the
leaders of these big tech companies see
artificial intelligence as the next big
thing coming around the corner. And so
they've kicked off what I say is kind of
an arms race where they're reshaping
their companies to figure out how to
build the next great AI product. But
they've realized that they don't have
the type of talent they need. They don't
have the type of organizational
structures they need. And their
solution, for a lot of them at least,
has been to just throw enormous amounts
of money at the problem.
>> And what kicked off this AI arms race?
Because it did not seem like it was
happening in this really obvious way
until pretty recently. So, if I had to
pick a moment,
>> I think we have the opportunity here to
kind of completely reimagine what it
means to use a computer,
>> it would be when OpenAI made this huge
announcement in May through this highly
produced video.
>> Johnny is the deepest thinker of anyone
I've ever met. and they revealed that
they were going to bring on Johnny IV,
the now legendary inventor of the
iPhone, iPad, iMac, the Apple Watch,
stuff that we use basically every day.
>> Right.
>> I have a growing sense that everything I
have learned over the last 30 years
has led me to this place and to this
moment.
>> They announced that they were going to
bring him on for $6.4 4 billion to help
develop the next great AI consumer
product.
>> Wow.
>> So, Donnie IV is partnering with Open
AI.
>> So much news from OpenAI this week, but
$6.5 billion.
>> Open AAI, which is the leader in AI
development, kind of musling into the
devices games.
>> And it's a really huge deal. It's a ton
of money. and everyone across the valley
kind of chafed at it because they
haven't given any details about what
this device would actually be and it's,
you know, unclear if it'll work. But I
think it planted the idea in a lot of
executives minds at some of these other
companies that, hey, this is now a
talent war.
>> And I'm assuming based on what we know,
what they do with all that anxiety is
channel it into spending. They open
their wallet.
>> That's right. I mean the one thing that
all of these companies have especially
the big companies is cash. You know all
of them are doing well financially but I
think the one that really typifies the
sort of excessive spending is Meta.
>> Okay. And what does that look like for
Meta? Tell me about that.
>> Yeah. So back in June, Sam Alman, the
CEO of OpenAI, decides to go on a
podcast that is conveniently hosted by
his brother. Look, I' i've heard that
Meta thinks of us as their biggest
competitor
>> and he confirms
Meta is aggressively trying to poach
people.
>> They started making these like giant
offers to, you know, a lot of people on
our team,
>> you know, like $100 million signing
bonuses.
>> And Alman says Mark Zuckerberg, the
chief executive of Meta, had been
offering OpenAI employees like $100
million signing bonuses to come over and
work on AI for Meta. I'm really happy
that at least so far none of our best
people have decided to take them up on
that.
>> But Zuckerberg really doesn't get super
far at this point because there's a lot
of OpenAI employees who actually like
working at OpenAI. They believe in the
mission. But then Mark starts to ratchet
things up.
>> He decides $100 million is not enough.
How about $200 million? How about $250?
How about we frontload half of that
offer within the first year? And then
you get the rest of it over four years.
He goes from, "Hey, this is crazy." to
this is generational wealth I'm about to
offer you someone who may be like a
22-year-old researcher at OpenAI.
>> And does that work? I mean, I'm sorry,
but 250 million might work on me.
>> Yeah. I mean, like, we could talk about,
you know, I believe in the mission all
day long, and then when someone, you
know, backs a dump truck full of money
up to your doorstep and says, "Here you
go." is hard to say no.
So he did start getting people. He got
someone at Apple who was very important
for you know more than $200 million.
>> This is roaming Ping the most respected
AI researcher and AI executive at Apple.
Uh he was basically holding everything
together there.
>> He started grabbing people from Google
and Deep Mind. Meta has appointed Xen
Jiah Xiao, co-creator of Chad GBD and a
key contributor to GPD4 as
>> there were some key OpenAI hires that he
started grabbing and bringing over to
Meta.
>> Look, I think they want to assemble the
top 50 AI researchers that are out
there. But I think a really big moment
was when Zuckerberg announced they had
purchased a 49% stake in this company
called Scale AI, which is essentially a
startup that kind of does this data
labeling for $14.3 billion. Wo. Now, a
source gave me more color around
incentives as well, saying that this is
more about Scale AI founder Alexander
Wang's AI network. And what he did was
pay that money to bring over Scales
28-year-old CEO Alexander Wang and a
number of his deputies to head up this
new organization that Zuckerberg is
calling Meta's new super intelligence
lab.
>> And Zuckerberg's apparently moving desks
in the office so that all of these
people can sit right by him.
Okay, so Zuckerberg is figuring it out.
It's not just him though, right? There
are other companies that have been
getting in on this.
>> Yeah, totally. This is when things get
really wild. I think every other company
in the valley starts kind of freaking
out and saying, "Hey, Zuckerberg is kind
of messing up our compensation here. We
need to figure out how to start coughing
up more money to keep our talent." And
you know, some of these researchers have
been there for a while. They certainly
aren't getting paid, you know, hundreds
of millions of dollars. And so, I think
what we started seeing is all of the
talent kind of congregating together and
strategizing for how they could take
advantage of this situation.
>> H can I ask who are by the way all these
people? What do they do that makes them
so valuable to these companies? So the
people that are really in high demand
these days are folks who are doing kind
of niche research called frontier
research which means they've been
pursuing farflung parts of AI research
that maybe most researchers are not
looking into and it's a pretty small
number of them are studying what's
called reasoning which is basically
helping to teach a computer to think
more like you and me when it's trying to
solve problems.
And there's just not a lot of people who
do this and do this well.
>> You know, I've I've heard people refer
to this as the kind of sportsification
of the tech industry. And and this is
why, right? I mean, typically you really
only hear of athletes getting lured to
new companies or or teams with this kind
of money, you know, like Show Otani
getting paid hundreds of millions to go
play for the Dodgers.
>> And look, hey, we don't chafe at that
when we hear it, right? I mean,
>> totally. It's crazy money, but at this
point it's sort of normalized, I think.
Like, of course, Steph Curry is getting
like a huge contract. Of course, you
want to pay LeBron a crazy amount of
money because they made these teams like
championship teams, right? That is the
analogy that a lot of tech CEOs are
making right now. And frankly, a lot of
the people inside of these companies,
like the rank and file, are starting to
see these folks as as superstars,
>> as difference makers.
>> Yeah. I mean, they may not be household
names to you or me, but certainly around
Silicon Valley, they have really good
reputations. There's even this show that
has developed over the past year. It's
called TBPN.
>> You're watching TBPN.
>> We start at 11:00 a.m. sharp.
>> It streams 5 days a week, 3 hours a day.
>> Speaking of AI research, we have a ton
of stories in the AI trade deal world.
Zuckerberg continues to be on a tear. is
basically a running commentary on the
tech industry, the media industry.
>> Amazing.
>> That kind of treats it like an ESPN
Sports Center type show, but for
business.
>> We got a red flag.
>> We got a red flag. Elon Musk and Sam
Alman are fighting. Mom and dad are
fighting.
>> It's really funny. They they do this
stuff where if someone goes to Meta,
they'll spin up a a funny graphic that's
like traded. Open AI guy becomes chief
scientist at Meta's super intelligence
labs and they have fun with it.
>> Apple Inc. is plotting its artificial
intelligence comeback. Don't call it a
comeback. Uh actually you can call it a
comeback. Give you
>> Yeah. And it sounds like there's a lot
of people that are interested in this
news and that that is kind of reflective
of how attuned the industry is to these
moves at this moment.
>> Very much so. I think, you know,
everyone in Silicon Valley is paying
very close attention to who's going
where, who's got the next big hire,
who's getting uh paid the craziest
salary.
And, you know, really, just like in
sports, everyone is watching to see how
these moves or these trades, if you
will, is going to affect other companies
and see who comes out on top.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Okay, I want to get into those questions
of how this money is actually changing
things, how the money is affecting the
landscape of AI as you're seeing it.
>> Yeah. So, look, I I think we should
remember we're literally in the middle
of all of this happening right now. You
know, this is like a moment in time. All
of this stuff is like a wild flurry of
trading people back and forth. These
companies are building new things.
Everything is up in the air. I do not
feel comfortable saying who's going to
win the race.
>> Sure.
>> That said, I think we can still look at
the landscape and see where companies
are right now and, you know, who's got a
great lead or who's the biggest long
shot. And I think that's something that
we can still just try to sus out.
>> Yes, let's do that. Give me a a power
ranking of these companies as it were.
>> Okay. When I think of this market, I
like to think of it in terms of
companies creating consumerf facing
products. And I say that because while a
lot of the rhetoric around AI is about
building the the next robot god or this
allseeing all- knowing AI, a lot of
these companies, you know, aside from
open AI, haven't been able to do
something pretty basic, which is just to
convince people to use artificial
intelligence in their everyday lives and
build a business around that. And so
when I think about that metric, I try to
break these companies down into three
different tiers.
There's the bottom tier, companies that
are definitely in the mix, but are
probably more of like a long shot in
this greater race.
>> You have Perplexity, which is a startup
that creates this Google search-like
product.
>> You have Anthropic, which is certainly
bigger. They have their own chatbot
called Claude which is used by people
and enjoyed but certainly not as widely
used as some others. And then you have
XAI, which is the artificial
intelligence wing owned by Elon Musk and
kind of grafted on to X, the social
network formerly known as Twitter that
has this chatbot called Grock, which you
know has done some interesting, even
impressive things, but when it screws
up, it screws up in a big way. There was
this moment where it decided it was a
Mecca Hitler bot and offended basically
everyone at the same time before they
had to apologize for it.
>> That's a pretty big error.
>> Yeah, that's uh that's not great. And I
think it's one of these things where
they have the advantages of having Elon
Musk and his endless bank account, but
they also seem to stumble in a very
highprofile way. Yeah, it's interesting
that Elon, who's, you know, often seen
as out ahead on so many things, does not
seem to be leading the pack on this.
>> So, what's tier two?
>> So, tier two, I would probably put the
more established tech companies. Think
Apple, Meta, Google, and these companies
have two key advantages,
scale and cash.
But they have a lot of disadvantages,
too.
Let's take Meta, which we've already
established is behind.
A lot of researchers are sort of worried
that Mark Zuckerberg doesn't have a
clear vision for what AI will look like
at Meta. And frankly, they don't want to
work on building the next algorithm that
keeps you in Instagram or Facebook for
longer because it's suggesting better
content using AI. That is not exactly
what they signed up for when they got
into the field. Hm.
>> Then, you know, Apple, I think they're
weak because, you know, even though
they've sold billions of iPhones at this
point, Siri, the AI tool that comes with
it is not even really thought of as an
AI tool. It's like a voice assistant
that only works half the time and is
considered pretty bad in Silicon Valley
circles. And even Apple acknowledges
Siri is not where it should be, right?
It's it should be this incredible
assistant. is what they promised it to
be and it just hasn't been. It hasn't
panned out because for years Apple has
not really invested in the type of
technology that these other companies
have. So I would say they have a lot of
potential but they're just not there
yet.
>> And Google
is interesting. You know Google has been
working on AI arguably the longest of
most of these companies. They have made
huge advances. They're very
missionoriented. They're likely
literally want to cure cancer. That is
huge in helping recruit talent. But I
think the AI that most people are
familiar with from Google is the little
summaries at the top of search results
that happen these days. And they've had
some, you know, pretty high-profile
stumbles with that summary. There was
this moment where they gave a recipe
putting glue on pizza, which is like, I
don't know about you, that's not
something I'm super into, but like It's
not quite Hitler chatbot, but it's
pretty bad.
>> I think in the rankings of bad, it's
down the ladder a little, but still like
the entire point of Google is getting
you the best search results. And that is
clearly not the best.
>> And I think we're now at the top tier,
right? Which I assume is the company
we've been talking about that everyone's
been chasing, Open AI.
>> That's right. Open AAI really kicked
this whole thing off a few years ago.
They were the ones that first released
the most successful chatbot. Millions of
people downloaded it overnight
basically. And to this day, they still
have an enormous amount of people using
it and continue to grow every single
day.
But they do have some disadvantages. You
know, for one, they're losing enormous
amounts of money because it costs a lot
of money to keep this successful chatbot
running. I think it's it's one of these
things where they're dramatically ahead
as far as the number of people using it,
but that can change almost overnight
sometimes if a company puts out another
better product.
>> And yet there is something remarkable
about the fact that this company is so
far ahead right now at least. And I
think it's because the American tech
industry is a place where there has been
a lot of talk of monopolies. You know,
there's these massive companies that
just own so much of the internet. And
then you have this industry that is like
the most important thing on earth to
many people right now.
>> And there's a company outside of the big
ones that's dominant.
>> I mean, this is honestly classic Silicon
Valley as a story, right? You may look
at Google, Meta, Apple. that think these
companies are going to be dominating the
landscape forever. But like I would have
said the same thing about Blockbuster
Video 20 years ago, right? Where of
course I go every Friday night and get a
movie and I go home and watch it on DVD.
Y
>> and then Netflix comes along and now
they're mailing you DVDs and then a few
years later they're streaming every
video to your TV at home so you don't
even have to leave your couch. Right?
It's the classic idea of the innovator's
dilemma. If you're big, if you're
dominant, you don't need to worry about
creating the next big thing because you
can just sort of coast on your laurels
and I don't know, let's milk the sports
analogy. You can keep playing defense
rather than offense.
>> Yeah. And and that leaves you behind
when an upstart comes in with something
new.
>> That's exactly right. And all these
companies are now kind of on their back
foot and trying desperately to catch up
to open AI which as you said came out of
nowhere and lapped them all.
>> We ranked well you ranked these
companies based on their relative
positions in the race toward a kind of
consumer product the effort to capture
the consumer market. I mean, and the
stakes for that, for getting people to
use this stuff seem pretty high given
how much we've said they're spending and
investing in this. And it's not just
salaries, it's the data centers, it's
developing these models in the first
place.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I have to ask, how sustainable is
that? I mean, many of these companies
are public companies. They have
shareholders. They have investors.
>> How long can this last? Is there a
limit?
It's a It's a good question. I
appreciate you bringing us back down to
earth with money because all this stuff
is insanely expensive. This is not just
billions, but hundreds of billions of
dollars in spending on infrastructure.
You know, building data centers is not
cheap.
>> Developing products that maybe people
use, maybe they won't is not cheap. It's
adding up and it's adding up quickly. I
think the companies have been given a
lot of latitude for years just because
they all basically print money. Google
created the perfect internet business
model with search ads. Meta has me
buying stuff on Instagram incessantly
and makes billions every quarter. You
know, as long as their businesses have
been running smoothly, investors have
allowed them to pursue these far-flung
ideas that are losing big amounts of
money. H
But I think we're starting to see the
limits of that mentality. In recent
weeks, Wall Street has started to get a
little shaky on this. They've seen how
much this stuff costs to build and
they're starting to ask more questions
saying, "Hey, can this be an actual
business? And do people want to use this
stuff?"
>> Yeah. on that there has been some talk
right of whether this might be a bubble
you know reminiscent of the kind of dot
bubble in the early 2000s where you had
this huge amount of internet startups
that had these insane valuations and
then that bubble popped
>> do you see that here is is that a
parallel
>> no one likes the b- word out here but
yeah I think I think it's totally I
think it's fair. Look, I mean, there's
so much money tied up in this. Every VC
firm is spending insane amounts to get
into AI companies. There's AI companies
built a top of AI companies, data and
infrastructure companies that are
relying on the success of this stuff.
It's kind of like all interconnected and
really dependent on each other's
success. And I think it's a really fair
and important to question whether this
stuff is going to even work out, not
treat it as an inevitability.
What does that mean for the economy?
Because so much of our economy is being
driven by this huge spending and this
this massive new industry. If the bubble
does go pop, what does that mean for the
rest of us? I mean, look, it reminds me
of how tied into this we all are. You
have to remember the big tech stocks
often lead the entire market, right?
Sometimes the Dow is up and down based
on the performance of Meta or Google or
Apple or whatever. My 401k is probably
tied up to this as is yours. You know,
this is kind of woven into our economy
whether we want this version of the
future or not. So in a way we are kind
of tied to the success here. The idea
that if you choose not to use chat GPT
doesn't insulate you from the idea that
AI is not going to affect you at all. I
think it's more woven into different
parts of how the world works than you
and I might realize.
>> Right. It's like even if you personally
are not bought in, the entire economy
is. So you're on this train.
>> Yep. Welcome aboard.
[Music]
Mike, thank you. Thanks for having me.
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
>> After we do this, we'll go to another
location and we'll make it safe. Also,
we're going to make our country very
safe. We're going to make our cities
very, very safe.
>> President Trump said that he planned to
target Chicago for his next federal
crackdown on crime.
>> Chicago is a mess. You have an
incompetent mayor, grossly incompetent,
and uh we'll straighten that one out
probably next. That'll be our next one
after this. Trump said the National
Guard deployment in DC was helping clean
up the city and suggested that he was
also willing to use active duty troops
on city streets.
>> We haven't had to bring in the uh the
regular military, which we're willing to
do if we have to.
>> But the president may not be able to
easily replicate the show of force in DC
in other major cities. Because DC is a
federal district, not a state, Trump has
more control there than anywhere else in
the country. That includes the ability
to take control of the local police
force.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wyn, Alex Stern, and Carlos Pto. It was
edited by Lexi Dio, Mark George, and
Maria Burn with help from Michael
Benois, and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Ketro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]